---
title: Dragoon
permalink: /Dragoon/
---

By far the most commonly seen assault form, the versatile dragoon is
capable of taking out armored humans while still being mobile enough to
leap over obstacles and human defenses. The advanced form provides
increased health and a barb attack. Advanced dragoons carry three barbs
that slowly regenerate over time and fire out in a long arc. These barbs
cause splash damage, which may prove problematic in melee.

## Tips

- You can pounce without a pause by starting to charge your pounce in
  mid air, right after your previous pounce.

<!-- -->

- Be careful where you shoot your barbs. It's very easy to wound or kill
  your team mates with them.

## Background

Prior to its assimilation by the alien hivemind, the dragoon was a
carnivorous predator inhabiting a high-gravity, mountainous planet. With
its powerful legs, it is capable of leaping from peak to peak, crushing
its prey with its enormous bulk and finishing the job with a powerful
bite. The dragoonâ€™s head is protected from concussions by the large head
plate extending from its skull, absorbing most of the shock from each
blow.

On its induction to the alien swarm, the dragoon received relatively few
genetic modifications, having already proven itself a powerful beast. To
operate in the lower gravity of most human habitats, the dragoon was
granted a reinforced head plate to take in the greater shocks that its
strengthened pouncing produces. In addition, an advanced form of the
dragoon was produced, with even greater leaping abilities, and a new
capability to launch explosive, spiny projectiles from its mouth. Up to
three are carried at a time by the dragoon, and are slowly regenerated.

Due to its violent, forceful nature, the dragoon often heads the primary
assault of alien invasions, leaping into the enemy base to tear apart
valuable equipment and defending humans so that lesser forms can sweep
in and finish the job. It is also a formidable opponent on its own,
rapidly closing the gap between it and a distant human with one or two
rapid jumps. Few are capable of taking down the vicious dragoon on their
own, and approaching one without suitable protection is akin to suicide.

## Dragoon in fight

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-07-Goon.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_2021-07-Goon.jpg" width="600" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_2021-07-Goon.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-07-Goon-front.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_2021-07-Goon-front.jpg" width="600" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_2021-07-Goon-front.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_Goon-staring_contest.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_Goon-staring_contest.jpg" width="600" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_Goon-staring_contest.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-11-Goon_on_ice.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_2021-11-Goon_on_ice.jpg" width="600" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_2021-11-Goon_on_ice.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-08-Goon_on_ground.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_2021-08-Goon_on_ground.jpg" width="600" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_2021-08-Goon_on_ground.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-08-Goon_front_on_ground.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_2021-08-Goon_front_on_ground.jpg" width="600" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_2021-08-Goon_front_on_ground.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

[Category:Aliens](Category:Aliens "wikilink")
[Category:Characters](Category:Characters "wikilink")