---
title: Entities
permalink: /Entities/
---

This page lists types of *BSP entities*, sometimes known as *map
entities*. A BSP entity is defined by a list of key-value pairs in the
entity lump of a BSP file.

Entity keys with a preceding underscore ("_") character are keys read
by the compiler. Keys with no preceding underscore are read by both the
compiler and the game. See the
[q3map2](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Q3Map2/Entity_keys) documentation
for more information. The worldspawn and `light` entities are also read
by the renderer.

To find examples of maps where a particular entity is used, you can
search for it
[here](https://users.unvanquished.net/~slipher/map-entity-directory.txt).
This list is generated by [a
script](https://github.com/slipher/source-tools/mapents.py).

## General Entities

### Game Entities

-

-

### Compiler Entities

- — Might also be used by the renderer for dynamic lighting.

- — Can be used for lights, but should not be used for anything else.

- — Used for grouping world brushes in the map editor.

-

-

-

## Control Entities

\|- \| \|\| \|\| \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\| testing \|\| testing \|\| testing
\|- \| \|\| \|\| \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\| testing \|\| extending \|\|
extending \|- \| \|\| \|\| \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\| colspan="3" \| reserved
for future use \|}

## Environment Entities

\|- \| \|\| \|\| position \|\| \|- \| \|\| \|\| position \|\|
ET_LIGHTFLARE \|\| testing \|\| unclear \|\| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\|
position \|\| \|\| testing \|\| extending \|\| extending \|- \| \|\|
\|\| position \|\| \|- \| \|\| \|\| position \|\| ET_PORTAL \|- \| \|\|
\|\| global \|\| \|\| testing \|\| extending \|\| extending \|- \| \|\|
\|\| position \|\| ET_SPEAKER \|\| testing \|\| extending \|\| extending
\|}

## Functional Entities

\|- \| \|\| \|\| mover \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\|
trigger-mover \|\| ET_MOVER \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\|
(non) mover \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| planning \|- \| \|\| \|\|
trigger-mover \|\| ET_MOVER \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\|
trigger-mover \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\|
trigger-mover \|\| ET_MOVER \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\|
? \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\| NULL \|\| NULL \|\|
colspan="3" \| mapeditor and mapcompiler domain \|- \| \|\| \|\| mover
\|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\| trigger-mover \|\|
\|\| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\| mover \|\| ET_MOVER \|\|
colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\| (non) mover \|\| \|\|
colspan="3" \| planning \|- \| \|\| \|\| (non) mover \|\| \|\|
colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \|\| mover \|\| ET_MOVER \|\|
colspan="3" \| unclear \|}

## Game Entities

\|- \| \|\| \|\| global \|\| testing \|\| testing \|\| testing \|- \|
\|\| \|\| player \|\| testing \|\| testing \|\| testin \|}

## Information Entities

Info entities only provide positional information for things controlled
by other processes.

\|- \| \|\| \|\| source point \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\| colspan="3" \|
subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\| source point \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\|
colspan="3" \| subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\| target point \|\| NULL
\|\| colspan="3" \| mapcompiler domain \|- \| \|\| \|\| point \|\| \|\|
colspan="3" \| subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\| point \|\| ET_GENERAL
\|\| colspan="3" \| subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\| point \|\| \|\|
colspan="3" \| subject to change \|}

## Light Entities

Also see [Light entities](Light_entities "wikilink")

\|- \| \|\| \|- \| \|\| \|}

## Pos Entities

\|- \| \|\| \|\| \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\| colspan="3" \| subject to change
\|}

## Sensor Entities

Sensor fire an event (usually towards targets) when aware of another
entity, event, or gamestate.

Sensors often can be targeted to toggle, activate or deactivate their
function of perceiving other entities.

\|- \| \|\| \| gamestate \| \| Testing \|\| Extending \|\|\| Extending
\|- \| \|\| \| gamestate \| \| Stable \|\| Testing \|\| Testing \|- \|
\|\| \| gamestate \| \| Testing \|\| Testing \|\| Testing \|- \| \|\| \|
gamestate \| \| Testing \|\| Testing \|\| Testing \|- \| \|\| \| entity
\| \| Testing \|\| Extending \|\|\| Extending \|}

## Target Entities

Targets perform no action by themselves. Instead, they are targeted by
other entities.

\|- \| \|\| \|\| activator \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| subject to change
\|- \| \|\| \|\| activator \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\| colspan="3" \| subject
to change \|- \| \|\| \|\| position \|\| ET_LOCATION \|\| colspan="3" \|
subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\| position \|\| ET_GENERAL \|\|
colspan="3" \| subject to change \|- \| ? \|\| \|\| configurable \|\|
ET_GENERAL \|\| colspan="3" \| subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\|
activator \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|\|
activator \|\| \|\| colspan="3" \| subject to change \|}

## Trigger Entities

Triggers cause a defined effect when aware of another entity, event, or
gamestate.

In that sense it's like an integration of a sensor and a target and
might in some cases be modeled by a combination of them. Triggers carry
often the benefit of being predicted client-side (since no entity chains
have to be resolved first) such as ( and ).

\|- \| \|\| \| \|\| \| colspan="3" \| Subject to change \|- \| \|\| \|
\|\| \| colspan="3" \| Subject to change \|- \| \|\| \| \|\| \|
colspan="3" \| Subject to change \|- \| \|\| \| \| ET_GENERAL \|
colspan="3" \| Subject to change \|-class="deprecated" \| \|\| \| \|
ET_GENERAL \| colspan="3" \| Subject to change \|- \| \|\| \| \|
`ET_PUSH_TRIGGER` \| colspan="3" \| unclear \|- \| \|\| \| \|
`ET_TELEPORT_TRIGGER` \| colspan="3" \| unclear \|}