---
title: Las Gun
permalink: /Las_Gun/
---

The first energy weapon available. It functions much like a vastly
improved rifle, at the cost of a decline in the rate of fire.

## Tips

- Use this against alien bases. It's great! Park yourself in a corner
  where you aren't being acid tubed, and fire away at eggs while your
  teammates shoot at other things.

<!-- -->

- Don't be afraid to duel with it, as long as you're good at keeping
  range. You don't need to make up for accuracy with this weapon, so it
  works fine at any range. Keep circling and firing until they're dead.

<!-- -->

- Use this in groups, much like the rifle. It'll make up for your lower
  firing rate, and the constant shooting will scare most aliens off.

## Background

Fulfilling a similar role to the more common rifle, the lasgun possesses
several advantages of its own. Unlike its bullet-churning cousin, the
weapon possesses a single large power cell, eliminating the need to
reload and allowing its user to keep a constant rate of fire for as long
as the cell is charged and the trigger is held. Each “shot” is a
pinpoint accurate, coherent burst of high frequency electromagnetic
radiation, invisible to human eyes but readily felt as a sudden shock of
intense heat that burns flesh with ease. The amplifier must be cooled
down between shots, and while this is accomplished in a fraction of a
second, there is still an easily noticed delay in comparison to the
rifle.

Although superior to the rifle in most regards, the lasgun’s components
are far more expensive to manufacture, and thus it is typically
entrusted to soldiers that show some degree of marksmanship and
survivability above that of a new recruit. Although eclipsed by the
other energy weapons in terms of damage output, it is highly regarded as
the most efficient weapon in the human arsenal.

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-11-Light_armor_with_lasgun.jpg"
title="File:Unvanquished 2021-11-Light armor with lasgun.jpg" />
<figcaption><a href="File:Unvanquished">File:Unvanquished</a>
2021-11-Light armor with lasgun.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

[Category:Humans](Category:Humans "wikilink")
[Category:Weapons](Category:Weapons "wikilink")