---
title: Mass Driver
permalink: /Mass_Driver/
---

The mass driver functions as the human team's sniper rifle, firing with
great accuracy over long distances due to the scope function, which lets
you zoom in on things.

## Tips

- With it you can kill [dretches](Dretch "wikilink") from any distance
  with a single shot.

## Background

Fulfilling the niche of a sniping weapon in the human arsenal, the mass
driver performs its role with lethal efficiency. The barrel of the gun
is a miniaturized linear accelerator, with coils of highly conductive
electromagnets running down the length. A large power pack is mounted
underneath the barrel, feeding into both the magnetic coils and the
fragile cartridge in the rear of the weapon. Each cartridge contains a
number of narrow metal slivers, which are expensive to manufacture due
to the high precision required in their manufacture, as even the
slightest imbalance in the projectile would lead to undesirable
inaccuracy. When the trigger is pulled, current flows into the magnetic
coil, producing a powerful field that propels one of the slivers out of
the weapon in a fraction of a second. Damage is caused not by the shot
penetrating flesh, but rather by the shot continuing through the
unfortunate victimâ€™s body, exiting the other side with a resulting
disruption of the internal anatomy that often proves fatal. Each firing
draws a large amount of energy from the power pack, which must be
replaced every few shots.

With a painfully slow rate of fire, the mass driver is by no means
intended to be used on the front lines. As a result, it comes equipped
with a targeting scope, allowing its user to aim from a safe distance.
Having a source of distraction for the aliens is often beneficial to its
user, such as the presence of teammates or automated base defenses to
keep the opponent occupied. Carrying a back-mounted battery pack grants
the wielder more shots, feeding more electricity into the power packs
before they blow out.

![<File:2021-11-07>
01-49.png](2021-11-07_01-49.png "File:2021-11-07 01-49.png")
![<File:Unvanquished> 2021-11-07Middle Armour
Mass-Driver.png](Unvanquished_2021-11-07Middle_Armour_Mass-Driver.png "File:Unvanquished 2021-11-07Middle Armour Mass-Driver.png")

[Category:Humans](Category:Humans "wikilink")
[Category:Weapons](Category:Weapons "wikilink")