---
title: Stories Humans
permalink: /Stories/Humans/
---

### Outset

In the early 23rd century, humanity sent its first ships to the stars.
Spurred on by the allure of new frontiers, the pioneers of interstellar
travel embarked on massive colony ships by the thousands, certain that
they would never see their homeworld again. In these old days of human
space travel, transit times to even the nearest stars took several
decades, and thus the colonists were kept in suspended animation, to be
awoken at their final destination. Some of the more unfortunate
volunteers ended up stranded in space, drifting through the endless sea
of darkness, while others met a swifter death during collisions with
asteroids or planets with powerful gravity wells. Yet, the multitude of
ships sent out ensured that some were bound to successfully reach their
targets, leading to the first human colonies.

Confronted with barren, rocky wastelands, the first generation of
colonists did not stray far from their landed ships, which had taken on
the role of providing life support and power generation. Each ship was
equipped with sufficient facilities for the nano-manufacture of tools
and industrial components that the colonists required, along with a
stock of blueprints containing the sum of all human technological
knowledge up until the date that the ship was launched. In addition,
each ship was stocked with a large complement of sterile, genetically
modified clones, along with the means to produce more of them. These
clones, created specifically for labor, were crucial to humanity’s
expansion through the stars.

With greater strength and resilience than the average human, along with
an utter lack of fear and a heightened tolerance for the harsh
conditions outside of the early colonial base, the clones tirelessly
performed manual labor for the colonists, mining for raw materials and
setting up the infrastructure for continued growth. Wearing protective
suits and equipped with hand-held devices capable of emitting a directed
spray of nano-machines, the clones laid down solar cells and ventilation
systems, allowing for the first structures to be built beyond the colony
ships. The first crops were grown in the lifeless soil of distant
worlds, supported by immense greenhouses and tended by teams of clones.

While many worlds were initially incapable of supporting life, and would
not be able to do so until the future introduction of terraforming by
later expeditions, a few were gifted with a suitable atmosphere that
permitted colonists to step outside with a bare minimum of protection,
and for a few hardy plants to grow beyond the immediate attention of
humans. These planets were the first to thrive, and would come to
attract the most attention from Earth, where newer generations were
lured into migration by the first transmitted images of vast grasslands
under a distant, setting sun.

Aided by the laborer clones and a wealth of unprocessed minerals, along
with a distinct lack of alien life, the earliest pioneers would enter
old age amidst the first cities to have been built outside of the ships,
with the deactivated ship itself often becoming a monument to the past.

### Expansion

In the following centuries, the human presence in space flourished with
the introduction of new starship engines that were capable of
approaching the speed of light, drastically cutting down on travel
times. A journey that originally took decades could now be accomplished
in several years, and formerly unreachable worlds on the frontiers of
inhabited space could at last be colonized. These new ships set off into
the unknown, equipped with the latest lines of laborer clones and
expanded nano-production facilities. Entire cities could be constructed
in the span of a single generation, and within half a century, many
colonies were self-sufficient enough to create and stock their own
orbital shipyards.

During this golden age of expansion, humanity as a whole reached new
heights, having colonized all worlds within fifty light-years of Sol,
and many beyond. With an essentially endless supply of raw materials,
new frontiers of science were explored on hundreds of worlds, the
scientific progress of countless researchers being transmitted back to
Earth, which had now found itself at the head of a growing interstellar
empire. The sole constraint being the speed of light itself, the human
race grew at an exponential rate.

Amongst the achievements in human science were the efficient containment
of plasma, the discovery of instantaneous short-range mass transfer, and
the further development of nanotechnology, allowing for the production
of far more intricate and advanced devices than previously thought
possible. Limited artificial intelligence became far more widespread
than in past centuries, although the development of humanoid machines
remained an elusive goal.

### Contact

Ever since the dawn of colonization, as humans on distant worlds looked
into the night skies, they often wondered if they were truly alone. The
lack of extraterrestrial life became particularly glaring when even the
most distant worlds to receive human visitors were utterly barren and
lifeless rocks. Just as the 28th century came to a close, humanity
received its response.

On the fringe of human space, where just a handful of recently colonized
worlds were eking out a meager existence, an urgent distress signal was
transmitted from one of the colonies, with increasingly frantic messages
of destruction and chaos leading into complete silence. Far away from
the assistance of the human military, and with purestrain human
reproduction at a premium, the colonists in the region had but one
choice. The labor clones would be the ones to go.

Their protective work suits modified into combat armor, the clones
boarded a makeshift warship, the first to have been constructed in a
region of space traditionally viewed as a backwater. Equipped with a
selection of weaponry and their traditional nano-construction devices,
they set off towards the source of the distress signal, only to discover
that their cluster of frontier stars was at the forefront of an
invasion.

Arriving at the world itself, the skies were black with the smog of
burning cities, the conflict still ongoing. Setting up transport links
between the warship and the few remaining human outposts, the clones
marched single file through the ship’s warp room, materializing on
receivers on the ground. They came across scenes of complete
destruction, the biomass of the planet itself being consumed by dark,
throbbing organic mats. Bizarre alien creatures emerged from the
shadows, shrieking multi-limbed beasts with fangs dripping corrosive
poison. The beings came in many forms, each adapted to a different role,
each a posing a new threat.

Yet, the clones did not back down. Lifting rifles for the first time
instead of their familiar construction kits, the precision learned in
years of manufacture and machining translated well to their aim. The
tireless laborers of humanity took to combat rapidly, holding off the
impending threat while the human colonists fled to safer regions towards
the core of human space. With the lengthy travel times and the slow
communication with the remainder of the empire, the clones have no
choice but to continue the fight, for the fate of humanity itself may
very well rest in their hands.

[Category:Stories](Category:Stories "wikilink")