---
title: Tyrant
permalink: /Tyrant/
---

The enormous tyrant is the end result of alien evolution, a hulking
behemoth capable of demolishing human defenses and quickly killing
anything not wearing a battlesuit. It's nowhere near as mobile as the
other aliens, but due to its size and great strength, it can best be
thought of as a living tank. Its charging attack knocks back humans and
constantly deals trampling damage, and it can even crush humans and
their structures by falling on them.

## Tips

- Your charge attack ends when you release the forward key, but it still
  allows you to move diagonally, allowing you to dodge without losing
  the sight of the human.

<!-- -->

- Tyrants are very bad at jumping. Be careful not to get hopelessly
  stuck in a pit.

## Background

The alien that was to become the tyrant originally inhabited the grassy
plains and savannas of its homeworld, where it subsisted on a mostly
herbivorous diet. Its powerful legs allowed it to accelerate its
enormous body into short bursts of terrifying speed, not only easily
sending potential predators flying for a great distance, but also
providing a means to challenge rivals prior to courtship displays. Packs
of tyrants roamed the grasslands freely, the very earth trembling
beneath them at every step. Endless conflicts between family groups kept
the species strong, and the number of tyrants at a sustainable level,
much to the relief of other inhabitants of their world.

Unlike many of the other alien forms, the tyrant was not encountered
until several decades after the invasions began. Many other
civilizations had fallen to the overwhelming swarms the hivemind was
capable of mustering, but humanity, with its highly developed technology
and usage of artificial intelligence in combat roles, proved too strong
of an opponent. Something larger was needed, a creature capable of
taking blows the lesser aliens would find lethal and returning them with
even greater force.

The first encounter between humanity and the tyrant occurred during a
boarding action, a battle from which only a single distress call
survives. It is from the terrified words of the human captain that we
learn shotguns and painsaws, standard fare among crewmen, were nothing
against its toughened hide. A few loud stomps drowned out the captain’s
screams, followed by a bloodcurdling roar and the sound of the ship’s
computer being torn into shreds.

Typically encountered towards the end of an assault, the tyrant towers
above all other aliens, its weaponized arms longer than the bodies of
most of its fellow creatures. There is no subtlety behind the tyrant, no
thought behind the sheer force it is capable of utilizing. Armor is torn
apart as if it was paper, and entire skeletons are fractured within
moments when the tyrant slams its opponent against a wall. As if mocking
the thought of its enormous body being easy to aim at, the very same
bulk crushes anything unfortunate enough to be underneath it. To go
alone against a tyrant is suicide, at best.

## Fighting

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_2021-07-Tyrant_Dretch.jpg"
title="File:Unvanquished_2021-07-Tyrant_Dretch.jpg" />
<figcaption><a
href="File:Unvanquished_2021-07-Tyrant_Dretch.jpg">File:Unvanquished_2021-07-Tyrant_Dretch.jpg</a></figcaption>
</figure>

A [Tyrant](Tyrant "wikilink") (large) fighting humans with a small
[Dretch](Dretch "wikilink").

The electric arc is made by an [Advanced
Maurauder](Marauder "wikilink").

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_Tyrant_near_LA.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_Tyrant_near_LA.jpg" width="1000" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_Tyrant_near_LA.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_Tyrant_face_meet.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_Tyrant_face_meet.jpg" width="1000" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_Tyrant_face_meet.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_Tyrant_in_back_LA.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_Tyrant_in_back_LA.jpg" width="1000" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_Tyrant_in_back_LA.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_Tyrant_in_back_LA-2.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_Tyrant_in_back_LA-2.jpg" width="1000" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_Tyrant_in_back_LA-2.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="Unvanquished_Tyrant_LA_crouch.jpg"
title="Unvanquished_Tyrant_LA_crouch.jpg" width="1000" />
<figcaption>Unvanquished_Tyrant_LA_crouch.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

[Category:Aliens](Category:Aliens "wikilink")
[Category:Characters](Category:Characters "wikilink")