---
title: Universal zip
permalink: /Universal_zip/
---

The Unvanquished universal zip contains the Daemon engine binaries for
all supported platforms, plus the DPK packages, for an Unvanquished
release. "Universal" refers to the fact that it includes software for
multiple operating systems and architectures. It is a reference archive
primarily intended for archival. It is not recommended for users to run
the game from the universal zip as it may lack convenient integration or
may even not run if the operating system does not allow programs to run
from random places.

However, the launcher may be unsupported for second-tier platforms such
as 32-bit x86 Linux or ARM Linux, leaving the universal zip as the only
option to acquire official binaries.

This link should always redirect to the download of the latest universal
zip: <https://unvanquished.net/download/zip>.

Universal zips starting from Unvanquished version 0.17 can be found at
<https://dl.unvanquished.net/release/>. Universal zips for more recent
releases can also be found [on
GitHub](https://github.com/Unvanquished/Unvanquished/releases). See
[Infrastructure/Distribution#Universal zip
download](Infrastructure_Distribution#Universal_zip_download "wikilink")
for more mirrors.

The universal zip is produced by [this
script](https://github.com/Unvanquished/release-scripts/blob/master/make-unizip).

As one of the installation steps, the downloads the same set of files
which are present in the universal zip to the installation directory.
However, the source is a
[torrent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent) rather than a zip
file.